# Royal Rumble Data Analysis

The WWE presents a product that is scripted entertainment in the veil of a legitimate sport. There are countless movies and tv shows that have depicted rare or impossible sporting events and outcomes, but professional wrestling as an art form relies on the suspension of the audience's disbelief- not merely for an hour or so, but in a sustained fashion over repeated viewings. Even though nearly every wrestling fan is aware of the fact that the product is scripted, they want it to be compelling theater. If a storyline is too predictable and/or doesn't align with what the audience desires as far as outcomes go, the outcry ranges from minor to near-revolt.

The Royal Rumble is an annual event that features a match by the same name, in which two wrestlers begin in the ring and another joins them every 2-3 minutes until 30 wrestlers have entered the ring. The only way to be eliminated from the match is by being thrown over the top rope and having *both feet* touch the ground (a quite literal rule that has been taken advantage of on many occasions). It is one of the WWE's biggest attractions of the year, and the winner of the event is guaranteed to appear in the title match at WrestleMania (i.e., there are huge implications both in and out of the storyline itself).

The accompanying CSV file labelled 'Rumble_Data.csv' contains raw individual wrestler data for each event. The cleaned and converted data is included in the CSV file labelled 'Rumble_Data_Cleaned_Final.' The columns include:

- year- the year in which the event occurred
- entry_num- integers from 1-30 (1-20 in 1988, 1-40 in 2011 and in the 2018 Greatest Royal Rumble) representing the order in which each wrestler entered the ring
- exit_num- integers from 1-30 (save caveats as above) representing the order in which entrants were eliminated
from the match. The wrestler(s) who have an exit_num equal to the number of participants are the winners.
- entry_time, exit_time- the timestamp on the WWE Network video of the match, converted into seconds beginning at t = 0, that indicate when a wrestler entered and exited the match.
- total_time- typically simply the difference beteween exit and entry time, however certain wrestlers have made use of the fact that they aren't eliminated if they leave the ring *underneath* the top rope and spent extended periods of time outside the ring. In these instances that time is also subtracted.
- name- the name of the wrestler. For certain wrestlers who have changed 'gimmicks' over the years there is no continuity between different iterations of their characters, and for some there is continuity. For example, the wrestler One Man Gang entered the 1988 Royal Rumble, and later that year was 'reborn' as Akeem in a televised segment. On the other hand, the wrestler who has portrayed the character of Kane for over 20 years with multiple championship reigns and strong performances in the Royal Rumble also spent some time as 'Fake Diesel' and 'Isaac Yankem DDS,' two cartoon-like characters without the same cache or in-universe power as Kane.
- elim_by, len_elim_by- a tuple indicating which participant(s) eliminated that wrestler and its corresponding length. This is useful to track because in many instances, very large and fearsome wrestlers require multiple participants to team up and eliminate them or are eliminated by illegal/accidental circumstances (e.g. Andre the Giant eliminated himself in 1989 as Jake 'the Snake' Roberts illegally entered the ring with his pet python and unleashed it on the remaining participants)
- solo_elim, group_elim, illegal_elim- tracking how many eliminations each participant had categorized by whether it was a *legal* solo effort, a group effort, or an illegal effort (group or solo). The same elimination can be classified in different ways for different participants (e.g. in 1992 a spurned and eliminated Hulk Hogan began illegally pulling Sid Justice out of the ring, while the remaining legal participant Ric Flair assisted in the elimination) 
alignment- the wrestler's character alignment as a 'face,' short for 'babyface,' (hero), 'heel' (villain), or neutral
- tag_team, tag_partner, tag_overlap- a dummy variable indicating if the participant is in a tag team or faction with at least one other participant in the match, a label variable with the name(s) of their partner(s), and the corresponding amount of time in which they spent in the ring with their partner(s) if the dummy variable is equal to 1.
- world_champ- a dummy variable which represents whether or not the participant had won some version of the WWE's world title(s) at any point before, or currently held such a title when that year's match occurred. In the majority of cases, the world champion(s) did not participate as the prize for winning the Royal Rumble is usually a match *against* the champion. The titles include the WWE championship (1988-2019), the World Heavyweight championship (2003-2013), and the WWE Universal championship (2017-2019)
- illegal_exit- a dummy variable indicating if the wrestler was eliminated illegally, or otherwise disqualified or unable to compete.
- world_reigns, ic_reigns, us_reigns- number of reigns as world champion, Intercontinental champion, and United States champion respectively prior to that year's match
- prev_app- number of years participated in prior to that year's match
- cum_elim, avg_cum_elim- cumulative elimination totals in gross and averaged across each year participated
- cum_time, avg_cum_time- cumulative time spent in the match in gross and averaged across each year participated
- break_begin, break_end, total_break, break- measures the beginning and ending of, as well as the length of an illegal break taken by a wrestler who exits the match underneath the ropes and spends time outside the ring. The 'break' variable is a dummy variable which equals 1 for anyone who took such a break and 0 otherwise.
- win- a dummy variable representing whether or not the wrestler won that year's match. Win is equal to 1 for only one wrestler per year except for 1994, as Bret Hart and Lex Luger eliminated each other simultaneously and they were declared co-winners.
- heel, face- dummy variable representing whether or not the wrestler is a 'babyface,' or hero, or 'heel,' a villain
- prev_win- number of previous Royal Rumbles won
- hoss- dummy variable equal to 1 if the wrestler is very large. Typically associated with wrestlers who can only be eliminated by the elite or by multiple wrestlers collaborating at once.
- time_prop- measures the ratio of the wrestler's total time in the match to the time they *could* have spend in the match, i.e. from their entry time until the end of the match